WHEREAS, the Board of Directors deems it to be in the best
interests of the Foundation and consistent with the
Foundation's purpose to establish a Project Management
Committee charged with the creation and maintenance of
open-source software related to project documentation, for
distribution at no charge to the public.

NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED, that a Project Management
Committee (PMC), to be known as the "Lenya PMC", be and hereby
is established pursuant to Bylaws of the Foundation; and be it
further

RESOLVED, that the Lenya PMC be and hereby is responsible for
the creation and maintenance of software related to project
documentation, based on software licensed to the Foundation;
and be it further

RESOLVED, that the office of "Vice President, Lenya" be and
hereby is created, the person holding such office to serve at
the direction of the Board of Directors as the chair of the
Lenya PMC, and to have primary responsibility for management of
the projects within the scope of responsibility of the Lenya
PMC; and be it further

RESOLVED, that the persons listed immediately below be and
hereby are appointed to serve as the initial members of the
Lenya PMC:

(ADD YOUR NAME AND EMAIL HERE)

   * Edith Chevier (edith@apache.org)
   * Dale Christ (bigdog@apache.org)
   * Christian Egli (egli@apache.org)
   * Andreas Hartmann (andreas@apache.org)
   * Rolf Kulemann (roku@apache.org)
   * Gregor J. Rothfuss (gregor@apache.org)
   * Thorsten Scherler (thorsten@apache.org)
   * Michael Wechner (michi@apache.org)


NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED, that

(PROPOSED NAMES, add more nominations if needed and add your vote)

Andreas Hartmann (accepted/declined) +1
Rolf Kulemann (accepted/declined) +1
Thorsten Scherler (accepted/declined)

  be and hereby is appointed to the office of Vice President, Lenya,
to serve in accordance with and subject to the direction of the
Board of Directors and the Bylaws of the Foundation until
death, resignation, retirement, removal or disqualification, or
until a successor is appointed; and be it further

RESOLVED, that the initial Lenya PMC be and hereby is tasked
with the creation of a set of bylaws intended to encourage open
development and increased participation in the Lenya Project;
and be it further

RESOLVED, that the initial Lenya PMC be and hereby is tasked
with the migration and rationalization of the incubating PMC
Lenya project; and be it further

RESOLVED, that all responsibility pertaining to the incubating
Lenya project encumbered upon the incubator PMC
be hereafter discharged. 