<html>
<head>
<meta name="generator" content="HTML Tidy, see www.w3.org" />
<meta http-equiv="Content-Type"
content="text/html; charset=iso-8859-1" />
<meta name="Generator" content="Microsoft Word 98" />
<title>Call for Participation for The Second Open Source Content
Management Conference to be held in San Francisco</title>
</head>
<body link="#0000ff" bgcolor="#FFFFFF">
<font face="verdana">
<p>
<font size="+2"><b>NOTE:</b> Call for Participation is closed</font>
</p>
<p><b><font size="-2" face="verdana"><a id="up" name="up"></a><a
href="#agenda">Preliminary Agenda</a> |</font> <font size="-2"
face="verdana"><a href="#format">Topics/Format</a> |</font> <font
size="-2" face="verdana"><a href="#submission">Submission</a>
|</font> <font size="-2" face="verdana"></font><a
href="#expense"><font size="-2" face="verdana">Speakers'
Benefits</font></a></b></p>

<p>&#160;</p>

<h4><font face="verdana">Call for Participation for The Second Open
Source Content Management Conference to be held in San Francisco
from 25 to 27 September 2002.</font></h4>

<p><font face="verdana" size="-1">The First Open Source Content
Management Conference held on 21 and 22 March 2002 in Zurich was a
great success. More than a hundred people attended.<br />
 There was much interest from people in the US to attend the
conference, but Zurich was considered as being a bit too far away.
Therefore, we decided to hold a second conference this year in the
US.</font></p>

<p><font face="Verdana, Arial, Geneva" size="-1"><b>For this second
conference we are now calling on qualified speakers to
participate.</b></font></p>

<p><b><font face="Verdana, Arial, Geneva" size="-1">It would be
great if YOU could give a speech with regard to Open Source Content
Management.</font></b></p>

<p><font face="Verdana, Arial, Geneva" size="-1">Please let us know
as soon as possible at
<a href="mailto:elisabeth.balzer@oscom.org">elisabeth.balzer@oscom.org</a>. 
Deadline is set
for 14 June 2002.</font></p>

<p><a id="agenda" name="agenda"></a> <b></b></p>

<p><b><font face="Verdana, Arial, Geneva">Very Preliminary
Agenda</font></b></p>

<ul>
<li><font face="Verdana, Arial, Geneva" size="-1">
Keynote speaker
<!--
Larry Lessig (to be confirmed)
-->
</font></li>

<li><font face="Verdana, Arial, Geneva" size="-1">1<sup>st</sup>
and 2<sup>nd</sup> Day: one-track conference sessions (see also <a
href="http://www.oscom.org/conferences/zurich2002/agenda.html">agenda
of first conference</a> )</font></li>

<li><font face="Verdana, Arial, Geneva" size="-1">3<sup>rd</sup>
Day: Workshops</font><font face="Verdana, Arial, Geneva"
size="-1"><br />
</font></li>
</ul>

<p><font face="Verdana, Arial, Geneva" size="-1">The conference
target audience are mainly developers of open-source content
management software, frameworks, standards, etc.<br />
 All other interested parties are very welcome as well.<br />
 We set an upper limit of 200 attendees.</font></p>

<p><a href="#up"><font face="Verdana, Arial, Geneva"
size="-1">(up)</font></a></p>

<p><b>&#160;</b></p>

<p><b><a id="format" name="format"></a><font
face="Verdana, Arial, Geneva">Topics for presentations and Format
of sessions:</font></b></p>

<ul>
<li><font face="Verdana, Arial, Geneva" size="-1"><a id="session"
name="session"></a><b>Conference Sessions:<br />
</b> The first and second day of the conference will consist of
one-track presentations which will normally last between 30 and 50
minutes.<br />
 These presentations should be related to some angle of open-source
content management. Potential areas of interest include Content
Management Softwares / Frameworks / Editors / Standards (e.g.
XACML, Webdav).<br />
 Please see also the <a
href="http://www.oscom.org/conferences/zurich2002/agenda.html">agenda
of the first conference</a> as reference.<br />
 Papers will be evaluated on the basis of originality, significance
of the contribution to the field and contribution to conference
program diversity.<br />
 Presentations given at the second conference will be posted during
or just after the conference on the oscom.org site.<br />
<br />
</font></li>

<li><font face="Verdana, Arial, Geneva" size="-1"><b><a
id="workshop" name="workshop"></a>Workshops:<br />
</b> The third day of the conference would be reserved for
workshops. These workshops will give developers of open source
content management software the possibility to explain and discuss
specifics of their software with participants in a more direct
environment.<br />
 These workshops might be multi-track with either 2-hour- or
half-day sessions.<br />
<br />
</font></li>

<li><font face="Verdana, Arial, Geneva" size="-1"><a id="poster"
name="poster"></a><b>Poster presentations:<br />
</b> We are considering the possibility of Poster Presentations.
They would be viewing only and remain throughout the
conference.</font></li>
</ul>

<p><a href="#up"><font face="Verdana, Arial, Geneva"
size="-1">(up)</font></a></p>

<p>&#160;</p>

<p><font face="Verdana, Arial, Geneva" size="-1"><b><a
id="submission" name="submission"></a></b></font><font
face="Verdana, Arial, Geneva"><b>Submission</b></font><font
face="Verdana, Arial, Geneva" size="-1">:</font></p>

<p><font face="Verdana, Arial, Geneva" size="-1">Please indicate
the following when submitting for participation:</font></p>

<ol>
<li><font face="Verdana, Arial, Geneva" size="-1">Your full name
and affiliation as to be presented in the program, and your e-mail
address to be contacted by the organization committee<br />
<br />
</font></li>

<li><font face="Verdana, Arial, Geneva" size="-1">Which format
would you like to participate in (you may choose more than
one):</font> 

<ol>
<li><font face="Verdana, Arial, Geneva" size="-1">Conference
Session on first or second day of conference</font> 

<ol>
<li><font face="Verdana, Arial, Geneva" size="-1">Title of your
paper/speech as to be presented in the program:</font></li>

<li><font face="Verdana, Arial, Geneva" size="-1">Expected length
of presentation:</font></li>

<li><font face="Verdana, Arial, Geneva" size="-1">Brief description
of content and aim of your presentation:</font></li>
</ol>
</li>

<li><font face="Verdana, Arial, Geneva" size="-1">Workshop on third
day of conference</font> 

<ol>
<li><font face="Verdana, Arial, Geneva" size="-1">Title of your
workshop</font></li>

<li><font face="Verdana, Arial, Geneva" size="-1">Length of your
workshop</font></li>

<li><font face="Verdana, Arial, Geneva" size="-1">Brief description
of content and aim of your workshop</font></li>
</ol>
</li>

<li><font face="Verdana, Arial, Geneva" size="-1">Poster
Presentation<br />
 yes / no: no further information needed at this moment</font></li>
</ol>
</li>
</ol>

<p><font face="Verdana, Arial, Geneva" size="-1"><b>Deadlines for
submission</b>:<br />
 Deadline is set for 14 June 2002. Please submit as soon as possible
if you intend to give a speech.</font></p>

<p><a href="#up"><font face="Verdana, Arial, Geneva"
size="-1">(up)</font></a></p>

<p>&#160;</p>

<p><font face="Verdana, Arial, Geneva" size="-1"><b><a id="expense"
name="expense"></a></b></font><font
face="Verdana, Arial, Geneva"><b>Benefits for
speakers:</b></font></p>

<p><font face="Verdana, Arial, Geneva" size="-1">Participants that
heve been accepted to give a speech do not have to register and do
not have to pay the conference fee. Expenses for accomodation, food
and travel up to a max. of US$ 1'000.- will be reimbursed.<br />
 This does not apply to Poster Presentations only.<br />
</font> <font face="Verdana, Arial, Geneva" size="-1">As a speaker
you will be able to subscribe to our mailing list for speakers.</font>
<br />
<font face="Verdana, Arial, Geneva" size="-1">
In addition, you may also subscribe to the <a href="http://www.oscom.org/mailman/listinfo/general">general mailing
list</a></font> <font face="Verdana, Arial, Geneva" size="-1">on
Content Management</font>
</p>

<p><a href="#up"><font face="Verdana, Arial, Geneva"
size="-1">(up)</font></a></p>

<p>&#160;</p>

<p>&#160;</p>

<p>&#160;</p>
</font>
</body>
</html>
