<?xml version="1.0"?>

<html>
<head>
<meta name="generator" content="HTML Tidy, see www.w3.org" />
<title>Untitled Document</title>
<meta http-equiv="Content-Type"
content="text/html; charset=iso-8859-1" />
</head>
<body bgcolor="#FFFFFF">
<p>SAN FRANCISCO</p>

<p>The Second Open Source Content Management Conference is
scheduled to take place in the San Francisco area from Wednesday,
25 September to Friday, 27 September 2002.</p>

<p>The event is organized by OSCOM, an international not-for-proft
organization for the promotion of knowledge-sharing between
developers of different open source content management software,
frameworks etc.<br />
 The aim of the conference is to bring together mainly developers
of open-source content management software, frameworks, standards,
etc. to share and discuss new developments. Of course, all other
interested parties are very welcome as well.</p>

<p>Details of the agenda, exact venue and registration should be
available starting June. You may add your name to our mailing list
for participants <font color="#FF0033">(link)</font> to be kept
informed on news about the conference.</p>

<p>&#160;</p>

<p>PROGRAM (no active link and content yet)</p>

<p>&#160;</p>

<p>REGISTRATION AND FEES</p>

<p>Registration should be available starting June. You may add your
name to our mailing list for participants <font
color="#FF0033">(link)</font> to be kept informed on news about the
conference.</p>

<p>Fees:<br />
 The regular conference fee for two days is $ 350 (early-bird $
300) and for three days is $ 500 (early bird $ 400); reduced fee
for students.<br />
 The fees include breakfast and mid-morning and mid afternoon
refreshments; they do not include lunch and accomodation.<br />
 Participation at an official dinner will be offered for a
fee.<br />
 Fees may be subject so minor changes before registration is
started.</p>

<p>&#160;</p>

<p>LOCAL INFORMATION (no active link and content yet)</p>

<p>&#160;</p>

<p>CALL FOR PARTICIPATION (das ist nun <a
href="http://www.balzer.ch/drafts/cfpneu.html">http://www.balzer.ch/drafts/cfpneu.html</a>)
/ Ich habe ein paar Sachen, die nun hier auf diesen Seiten sind,
rausgeschnitten.</p>

<p>&#160;</p>

<p>CONTACT/OC</p>

<p><b>Contact:<br />
</b> For further information mail to contact@oscom.org (falls
aufgesetzt, sonst vorlaeufig oscom@balzer.ch)</p>

<p><b>Organizing Committee:</b><br />
 The event is organized by OSCOM, an international not-for-proft
organization for the promotion of knowledge-sharing between
developers of different open source content management software,
frameworks etc.</p>

<p>The Organizing Committee for the event in San Francisco consists
of:<br />
 Michael Wechner, Switzerland<br />
 Eric Wiseman, USA<br />
 Gregor Rothfuss, Switzerland<br />
 Henri Bergius, Finland<br />
 Elisabeth Balzer, Switzerland (administration)</p>
</body>
</html>
