<?xml version="1.0"?>

<html>
<head>
<title>Press Release</title>
</head>
<body bgcolor="#FFFFFF">
<font face="verdana">
<h3>Press Release</h3>

<p>
             Announcing: OSCOM Berkeley 2002
    First U.S. Conference For Open Source Content Management
                Charles Nesson To Give Keynote
         Organized By Developers, For Developers
</p>

<p>
July 10, 2002 - OSCOM, the international not-for-profit dedicated to
Open Source Content Management, today announces its second conference,
to be held September 25-27 in Berkeley, California.  Charles Nesson
from the Berkmen Center for Internet &amp; Society,
will deliver the keynote address.  With
presentations from over ten leading content management system (CMS)
projects and a full day of tutorials, the conference promises to
galvanize the role of open source in the CMS market.
</p>

<p>
Hundreds of developers will settle into the beautiful Lawrence Hall of Science for a full program, including:
</p>

<p>
  o Keynote by Charles Nesson
</p>

<p>
  o Presentations from 11 open source CMS projects, including Midgard,
  Postnuke, RedHat CCM, WebDAV, Lenya/Cocoon, and Zope
</p>

<p>
  o Developer day for hands-on work in a tutorial setting with many of
  the projects
</p>

<p>
  o Social events such as a group dinner to meet the leaders in
  content management as well as other developers
</p>

<p>
Developers working in the field of content management will find OSCOM
Berkeley 2002 a can't-miss event, plus a chance to participate in a
growing movement.  Open source is a leading force in the software
industry in general, and in content management in particular.  The
market has no established leaders, low international acceptance, and
high customer dissatisfaction.  Thus, the OSCOM movement is working to
help developers collaborate, but also to educate the CMS market
regarding the benefits of open source choices.
</p>

<p>
OSCOM Berkeley 2002 is the second in an international series of
events.  The inaugural conference was held in Zurich, Switzerland
during March 2002, and proved a tremendous success.  A third event is
being planned for Tokyo.
</p>

<p>
The conference will be held September 25-27 in Berkeley, CA.  Early
bird registration is available from the website
(http://www.oscom.org/) with a two-day pass for $300 and three-day
pass for $400.  Students discounts are available.
</p>

<p>
About OSCOM
</p>

<p>
OSCOM is an international not-for-profit dedicated to Open Source
Content Management, based in Zurich, Switzerland.  The primary goal of
OSCOM is to build a network between the community of open source
content management developers.  The primary activities for OSCOM focus
on organizing conferences and representing open source content
management in the media.  OSCOM is run by developers, for developers,
and has a board consisting of open source leaders.  For more
information on OSCOM, please contact Paul Everitt (<a href="mailto:press@oscom.org">press@oscom.org</a>).
</p>

<p>
Press Contacts
</p>

<p>
For information concerning the conference or OSCOM itself, please
contact Paul Everitt (<a href="mailto:paul.everitt@oscom.org">paul.everitt@oscom.org</a>) or Elisabeth Balzer (<a href="mailto:elisabeth.balzer@oscom.org">elisabeth.balzer@oscom.org</a>). 
</p>
</font>
</body>
</html>
