<?xml version="1.0"?>

<html>

<head>
<title>Registration and Fees</title>
</head>
<body bgcolor="#FFFFFF">
<font face="verdana">
<p>
<font size="-2">
<a href="#fees">Conference Fees</a>&#160;|&#160;<a href="#registration">Registration and Payment</a> |<a href="#cancellation"> Cancellations and Substitutions</a>
</font>
</p>
<h3>
OSCOM 2002 Berkeley, California - Registration now open!</h3>
<p>
<font size="-2">
Second Open Source Content Management Conference
Wednesday, 25 September 2002, 8:00 to Friday, 27 September 2002, 17:00
at the <a href="http://www.juliamorgan.org/directions.shtml">Julia Morgan Center for Arts</a>,
2640 College Avenue, Berkeley, CA 94704
</font>
</p>
<p>
<font size="-2">
You may add your name to our mailing list for <a href="http://www.oscom.org/mailman/listinfo/participants">participants</a>
to be kept informed on news about the conference.
</font>
</p>
<h3>
<a NAME="fees"></a><b>Conference Fees:</b></h3>

<table BORDER="1" COLS="3" WIDTH="100%">
<tr>
<td></td>

<td><font size="-1">Early-bird Rate</font>
<br /><font size="-1">(until August 31)</font></td>

<td><font size="-1">Regular Rate</font></td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td><font size="-1">3-day-pass incl. dinner</font></td>

<td><font size="-1">U.S. $440</font></td>

<td><font size="-1">U.S. $540</font></td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td><font size="-1">3-day-pass excl. dinner</font></td>

<td><font size="-1">U.S. $400</font></td>

<td><font size="-1">U.S. $500</font></td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td><font size="-1">2-day-pass (any 2 days) incl. dinner</font></td>

<td><font size="-1">U.S. $340</font></td>

<td><font size="-1">U.S. $390</font></td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td><font size="-1">2-day-pass (any 2 days) excl. dinner</font></td>

<td><font size="-1">U.S. $300</font></td>

<td><font size="-1">U.S. $350</font></td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td><font size="-1">Student Special* 3-day-pass incl. dinner</font></td>

<td><font size="-1">U.S. $100</font></td>

<td><font size="-1">U.S. $100</font></td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td><font size="-1">Student Special* 3-day-pass excl. dinner</font></td>

<td><font size="-1">U.S. $60</font></td>

<td><font size="-1">U.S. $60</font></td>
</tr>
</table>
<font size="-2">
<p>
*Student Discounts:<b> </b>Current university ID must be presented at on-site
registration.
</p>
<p>
Registration includes admittance to the selected days' session including
breakfast and refreshment breaks. Attendees are responsible for making
their own hotel arrangement.
</p>
</font>
<h3>
<a NAME="registration"></a>Registration and Payment:</h3>
<p>
To guarantee confirmation, payment in advance is required.
</p>
<ul>
<li>
Please <b><a href="http://www.acteva.com/go/OSCOM/">register on-line</a></b>
using a <b>credit card</b> (American Express, Mastercard, or Visa) at Acteva
(this is the preferred method of registration and payment).</li>

<br />Online registration is available up until the Conference starts. Early-bird
registration discounts are offered until 31 August 2002. You will receive
confirmation via e-mail.
<br />If you need a pro-forma invoice or encounter any problems please contact
<a href="mailto:oscom@balzer.ch">oscom@balzer.ch</a>.
<br />&#160;
<li>
We can also accommodate registration with payment through <b>bank transfer</b>.</li>

<br /><font color="#000000">Please contact us for bank transfer details and
e-mail your name, mail and e-mail address, as well as what conference passes
you would like to register for at </font><a href="mailto:oscom@balzer.ch">oscom@balzer.ch</a><font color="#000000">.
We will then e-mail you an invoice with the information for bank transfer.
Once payment has been received, you will receive confirmation by e-mail.</font>
<br />To qualify for early-bird registration discounts, your registration
<b>and payment</b> must be received by 31 August 2002.
<br />Registrations received after 16 September 2002, may not be acknowledged
and must be resubmitted for processing on-site.
<br />&#160;
<li>
On-site registration is discouraged. If required, please contact <a href="mailto:oscom@balzer.ch">oscom@balzer.ch</a>.</li>
</ul>

<h3>
<a NAME="cancellation"></a>
<b>Cancellations and Substitutions:</b>
</h3>
<p>
Full refunds will be granted for cancelations submitted to OSCOM at <a href="mailto:oscom@balzer.ch">oscom@balzer.ch</a>
no later than Tuesday, 17 September 2002. A 10% handling fee will be applied
to all canceled registrations, with the minimum fee being U.S. $25. After
17 September, no refunds will be given.
</p>
<p>
Substitutions (name changes) may be made without penalty at any time
by contacting OSCOM at <a href="mailto:oscom@balzer.ch">oscom@balzer.ch</a>.
</p>
<br />&#160;
<br />&#160;
<br />&#160;
<br />&#160;
<br />&#160;
<br />&#160;
</font>
</body>


</html>
